+++
date = 2017-09-24
draft = false
tags = ["Data650", "Data Visualization", "Rstudio", "ggplot"]
title = "Blog 2017-09-24 Data Visualization (blog#2)"
math = false
summary = """
Data Visualization example in R-studio (9-22).
"""
+++

OK so this is attempt 3 for this blog post.  We're (that would be the royal we-I don't have a mouse in my pocket) going to get the text up & then work from there. 

We used R-studio to create a scatter plot of baseball information (from the Lahman library).  Aside from learning how to do the scatter plot, the most interesting thing I learned is that the "css" that I keep seeing in the sample blog has to do with viewing the HTML information.  I had been wondering what all of them were (and now I know)

I. Our first step was to open r-studio and install all the packages we would need and then bring them all in with 'library':

- Lahman
- dplyr
- ggplot2
- ggiraph: which is the HTML widget (no clue what that means-but let's move on)
- so I figued out how to make the bullet points above by adding a space after the dash
  
II. We pulled some interesting information: players with more than 400 career Home runs, but we also wanted to know the number of strikeouts too.  We used the following code:

Batting %>%
  group_by(playerID)%>%
  summarize(career_HR=sum(HR), career_SO=sum(SO))%>%
  filter(career_HR >=400)
  
Since we will be using this information to create graph, we want to define it as a table.  The table name is df.  we put a 'df<-' (the carrot & dash make a little arrow) before 'batting' and then after the code close/end the table with another 'df' a space below.

III. We then created our graph using ggplot, in the same way that the '%>%' is the continuation character for r markdown, the '+' is the continuation character for  ggplot.  the 'aes' (asthetic) is for the xy axis.  The geom_point indicates we want a scatter plot (points).  If we wanted some other type, like a bar chart we would use geom_bar.  ggtitle gives our graph it's name, and the xlab & ylab (label) give the axes names.

ggplot()+
  geom_point_interactive(data=HR_vs_SO,aes(x=career_SO,y=career_HR))+
  ggtitle("career Homeruns vs. Strikeouts for great hitters")+
  xlab("Career Strikeouts")+
  ylab("Career Homeruns")

again we want to 'save' this so we name it (like we did the batting information) 'g<-' before ggplot.

This gives us a nice visual, but we don't know what (or rather who) the points represent.

IV. So we use colnames(master) to find out the table names in the Lahman information.  Now we want to 'paste' together the first & last names.  The following code is added to the 'Batting' code to show the first & last names:

HR_vs_SO<-inner_join(df,Master,by=c('playerID'))%>%
  select(nameFirst,nameLast,career_HR,career_SO)
  
HR_vs_SO$name<-paste(HR_vs_so$nameFirst, HR_vs_so$nameLast)

'V.' Now we add a little more code we define the name as a tool tip & modify our gg plot code so that as we hover over our points, we get the names:

geom_point_interactive(data=HR_vs_SO,aes(x=career_SO,y=career_HR,tooltip=name, data_id=nameLast))

VI.Ok, so the final code looks like this:

df<-Batting %>%
  group_by(playerID)%>%
  summarize(career_HR=sum(HR), career_SO=sum(SO))%>%
  filter(career_HR >=400)

df

HR_vs_SO<-inner_join(df,Master,by=c('playerID'))%>%
  select(nameFirst,nameLast,career_HR,career_SO)

HR_vs_SO$name<-paste(HR_vs_so$nameFirst, HR_vs_so$nameLast)

HR_vs_SO
#-------------------------------------------------

g<-ggplot()+
  geom_point_interactive(data=HR_vs_SO,aes(x=career_SO,y=career_HR,tooltip=name, data_id=nameLast))+
  ggtitle("career Homeruns vs. Strikeouts for great hitters")+
  xlab("Career Strikeouts")+
  ylab("Career Homeruns")+
  
HR_vs_SO$name<-paste(HR_vs_so$nameFirst,HR_vs_so$nameLast)
  
ggiraph(code=print(g),hover_css = "fill:white;stroke:black")  




Note: I'm using Roman numerals because when I tried '1,2'3" it made them all  "1".  I found some info on line about "ordered lists" in HTML, but I'm not sure how to insert it into the HTML file (I think it will go in the public/post/index.html file.  I'm going to need to find out a little bit more to be sure.